---
layout: default
title: Project Overview
nav_order: 2
---

# Project Overview

Robert's page.

### Problem Statement

  According to the 2021 Volunteer Management Progress Report (VolunteerPro, 2021) the biggest problem in Volunteerism for organizations is recruitment. It is evident that the process of recruitment for volunteers can be quite tricky, however we believe this issue is multifaceted. For instance, the issue with recruiting of volunteers can not only be attributed to a lack of trying from the organization but rather to the absence of opportunities presented to potential volunteers. Although there are other reasons as to why volunteers can be difficult to attain, like ‘volunteer inertia’ (Hallett et al., 2020), we believe it is crucial to at least create a system where volunteer work can be easily accessed. Thus, the purpose of this project is to design an application that will allow individuals to easily access volunteer opportunities near them in a way that allows them to feel that they have made a positive impact.     

### Motivation

  There is an ever-increasing need for organizations of all types to find people both willing and able to provide support to advance their goals. This is clearly the case with organizations that have hiring needs, and we see in the labor market today that both finding and retaining employees is becoming increasingly more difficult. But there is just as much of a need for volunteer labor as there is for jobs, and matching willing and able volunteers with organizations in need of their support is, again, only becoming more difficult. Often, information about organizations that need help is highly fragmented online and potential volunteers can easily miss opportunities to advance causes that they would genuinely love to participate in. Therefore, we would like to propose an effort to close this gap as much as is possible: our team will design a website that can serve as a centralized platform for people that are willing to volunteer their time and skills to organizations that most need them. Technology can be a powerful tool for organizing information in a coherent fashion, and our platform aims to do this with minimal effort on the part of organizations already in need of additional help.

  Typically, organizations that are in need of support from volunteers do not have the resources that companies with the ability to pay for work do to market their need and recruit to fill it. Because of this, these organizations rely heavily on word of mouth and maintaining close ties to individuals that have either given their time or money in the past through traditional mailers and mass emails. There is a largely untapped population who have either never previously given their time to a local organization or may have recently relocated and are not aware of organizations in their locale. Scott McFarland, former Executive Director of Serve Illinois, a governmental body charged with increasing volunteer engagement in Illinois, said, “When we ask people why they don’t volunteer, they tell us that they either didn’t know where to go or no one asked them to”(IDPH, 2016). We strive to address this exact issue with this tool. There is also a need for more personal support in some communities, and we have discussed the potential to incorporate a way to match volunteers with members of their community that need help with personal chores, such as elderly individuals that do not have existing familial support. 
  
### Issues in Existing Systems

One problem with the current ad hoc nature of allocating volunteer resources is that people with a desire to help will help most readily to causes they are already aware of. Thus, smaller and less known organizations lose out on much needed help to larger groups that have more of an established place in the community or budgets to market themselves. Our platform will address this by having a very prominent featured section on both the desktop and mobile views for underrepresented organizations will gain much more utility out of one hour of volunteer work than a larger organization.

Additionally, another major barrier in the existing systems of volunteering today is that organizations are not able to have their cause reach many people. Research suggests that many people want to volunteer, however, are not able to because of restrictions. One of the biggest barriers is that potential volunteers don’t volunteer because they haven’t been asked by anyone (Yotopoulos, n.d.). The reasons as to why many people are not asked to volunteer is because many organizations don’t have the means to set up recruiting procedures. Our application will attempt to solve this issue by providing organizations an outlet to reach many people. The application will also aim to match potential volunteers with volunteer work that they would be interested in, thus increasing the probability of organizations finding fitting volunteers.     

### Path to a Caring World

Our platform will support a caring world because it will tap into the existing desire of many people to help in their communities. Even if this tool does nothing other than its primary goal of closing the gap between individuals’ existing desire to help and their lack of knowledge about where to help, it will facilitate more care in the world simply by more efficiently utilizing human resources. Going further beyond this, however, a stretch goal for this platform is to encourage even more engagement in communities than currently exists. The aim is to leverage the positive power of peer pressure by having individuals that previously had no interest in giving their time see others in their community being empowered by the platform and reflecting on why they don’t also pursue such activities. The combination of better utilizing existing desire to help and creating new desire has the potential to transform communities.
